---
layout: doc-cs
redirect_from: "/old/breeze-sharp-documentation/.html"
---

#Release notes
These **Breeze Sharp Release Notes** summarize the key changes. Please read the documentation for more details.

##<a name="0603"></a>0.6.0.3 <span class="doc-date">September 22, 2014</span>##

#### Features
+ Support for Windows Phone 8.1.
+ Support for canceling asynchronous requests.

#### Defects
+ Fix to handle ISO 8601 duration <-> TimeSpan properly.
+ Fix for AutoGenerated string bug.

##<a name="0602"></a>0.6.0.2 <span class="doc-date">June 30, 2014</span>##

#### Features
+ Updated API docs
+ A new 'ActionEventArgs' parameter has been added to the event args associated with the EntityManager.OnEntityChanging/OnEntityChanged events.
   +  This parameter contains the actual event args associated with the underlying *EntityAction* that caused the EntityChange event to fire.  So this might be a PropertyChangeEventArgs for a 'PropertyChange' *EntityAction*, or an EntityQueriedEventArgs for a 'MergeOnQuery' *EntityAction*.  Note that the ActionEventArgs is currently only set for a subset of all EntityActions.
+ The DataService constructor now takes an optional HttpClient argument. (Note that this is a breaking change from 0.5.5 - where the optional parameter was an HttpClientHandler.  This change was made because of use cases where the HttpClient provides capabilities not available from the HttpClientHandler. ).

#### Defects
+ Fix for D2616 - server side Entity Framework Validation errors not propagating properly to client.

##<a name="0590"></a>0.5.9.0 <span class="doc-date">June 18, 2014</span>##

#### Features
+ NuGet package support for Xamarin. 

#### Defects
+ Fix for bug where a nullable int , when set to zero on client, was being changed back to null on SaveChanges()
+ Fix for several bugs related to enum properties
+ Fix for EntityManager.FetchMetadata issues when using the Breeze native format ( as opposed to the CSDL format).

##<a name="0550"></a>0.5.5.0 <span class="doc-date">June 3, 2014</span>##

#### Features
+ The ability to return types with enum properties is now supported as well as the ability to query against enum properties. 
+ The DataService constructor now takes an optional HttpClientHandler.

#### Defects
+ Invalid maxLength validators are no longer added for byte[] columns.

##<a name="0540"></a>0.5.4.0 <span class="doc-date">May 5, 2014</span>##

#### Features
+ There is a new Configuration 'singleton' class. 
+ Each EntityManager now has a MetadataStore property.  This returns, by default, a distinct
store, but the property is settable and MetadataStores can be shared between EntityManagers.

#### Breaking changes

+ The Breeze.Sharp MetadataStore is no longer a singleton. So references to MetadataStore.Instance now must 
reference a specific instance instead of the singleton; often this is the instance from the local EntityManager.
+ MetadataStore.Instance.ProbeAssemblies has become Configuration.Instance.ProbeAssemblies.
   
##<a name="0535"></a>0.5.3.5 <span class="doc-date">May 1, 2014</span>##

#### Features
+ Additional Standard Validators added including
   + RegexValidator
   + PhoneNumberValidator
   + UrlValidator
   + EmailValidator

## 0.5.x.x# 
###<a name="05xx"></a>0.5.x.x <span class="doc-date">Apr 1, 2014</span>###
Initial release.  


